well today after Iraqi leader Saddam
Hussein ordered an additional quarter
million Iraqi troops into Kuwait and a
week after President Bush decided to
send another 200,000 US troops to the
Gulf region the Center for
Constitutional Rights filed the suit on
behalf of the 45 lawmakers
good morning I'm Ron Dellums and we've
just filed the necessary documentation
to bring suit in the federal district
court washington d.c that would seek
injunctive and declaratory relief on the
question of who has the authority to
make war we believe that the president
is wrong and answering the question
should you seek prior authorization in
using offensive military option in the
context of the Persian Gulf and his
response has been my read of the
Constitution is that I don't need to do
that we think that the president is
wrong and we filed this lawsuit saying
that only the Congress of the United
States has the capacity to declare war
on the article 1 section 8 of the
Constitution I'm joined this morning by
two of my distinguished colleagues and
the two attorneys that will be arguing
this case I'm extremely pleased at 44
the members have joined me in what I
consider a very significant question
before the country at this particular
moment
this case presents a historic
opportunity for the my name is Jules
Lobel a professor from the University of
Pittsburgh and a lawyer with the Center
for Constitutional Rights in New York
this pet case presents a historic
opportunity for the federal courts to
answer the question of who has the right
to declare war and initiate war it is
clear that our Constitution gives that
authority to Congress and not the
president yet the president in this case
has said that he's going to heat is not
going to consult Congress it's not going
to seek the consent of Congress before
he goes to war and we think that is
illegally raw illegal and wrong if the
president does go to war without the
first seeking and obtaining the consent
of Congress then the victim of Iraqi
aggression will not just be Kuwait but
the Constitution of the United States
thank you
I think it should be fundamental in this
country that one man cannot go to war
what our Constitution said is that the
wisdom of our Congress should be
necessary to vote upon the important
issue of whether America should expend
its resources and its people in what
could be a major war we have lived
through a situation before where
Congress was not did not vote on whether
or not we should have a war and that was
Vietnam we should not have that
situation again the Congress should
debate and decide whether this country
should go into war we're hopeful that
this court the federal court here will
hear this case very quickly we've asked
for a hearing within 10 days the judge
on the case is Judge Harold Greene and
we are hopeful that he will hear this
case and decide really what the
Constitution says which when it's very
explicit in saying it is Congress's
power to declare war this is not a power
of the President of the United States
the president should be clear at this
point that he should be going to
Congress to get an authorization to go
to war here we can go all over the world
getting concerns from foreign countries
and he cannot go to the Congress of the
United States which represents the
people of the United States hopefully
this court will tell him go to the
Congress thank you well obviously the
the president has something in mind he
is going to other countries including
the Soviets getting permission or
getting their consent to go to war but
he should tell us he should tell the
American people by telling the Congress
and then the decision will be made by
Congress and that is what the
Constitution requires there is no
necessity for a quick action here we are
not being invaded there is no reason at
all why the Constitution in this case
should not be honored and that's what
this lawsuit is all about
good morning I'm congressman Marcy
Kaptur I represent the 9th District of
Ohio the greater toledo area northwest
ohio and i joined this suit today and
speak as one of the junior members of
the Congress of the United States one
who grew up during the Vietnam era and
whose friends fought and died in Vietnam
America lost over 50,000 of our best
sons and daughters in that war and
probably in a less told story since that
time we have lost an equal number here
at home through battle related illnesses
and suicide they fought an undeclared
war that split this nation in two and
left our troops subject to the abuses of
war and the added abuses of coming home
to a nation divided the state of Ohio
from which I come has the second largest
number of veterans in this country after
the state of California our people have
proven their willingness to fight but
they have a right to know why we as
members of Congress hold a sacred trust
with our troops in the field and with
the American people here at home we must
meet our constitutional responsibilities
to deliberate and vote on any act of war
as a member from the Vietnam generation
when I was privileged to be sworn in as
a member of the Congress I promised
myself at that time I would never be a
part of any undeclared war i joined this
suit on behalf of every mother of every
wife of every husband and father and any
relative who has a loved one serving our
country faithfully in the Middle East
they and you have a right to a Congress
that does not shrink from its
responsibilities we have a
responsibility to act and to vote thank
you
that concludes our opening remarks if
you have any question could you just
talk a little bit about how you see
Congress's role under the Constitution
what what you said that this was
preservation of the Constitution is at
stake or someone say that if you just
talk about that yes as I said before
article 1 section 8 of the Constitution
says that the Congress of the United
States have the power to declare war and
the President of the United States has
stated on a number of occasions that he
under certain circumstances would be
prepared to use a military option as a
way of solving the so-called crisis in
the Persian Gulf as I said before the
president has then been asked would you
seek prior authority otter ization from
the Congress prior to taking that action
and he said I don't believe that that's
my read of the Constitution that I have
the right to do it we believe that the
president has a responsibility in this
situation to send to the Congress of the
United States a declaration of war at
that point the political question then
is before the Congress of the United
States and we can debate the political
question there are some of us who
believe that in the context of the
persian gulf war would be catastrophic
and totally unacceptable there may be
other members of Congress who come to a
different conclusion but that is a
political statement and those issues get
resolved in an open and honest and tough
debate on the floor of the United States
Congress but what we're saying in this
lawsuit is that procedurally the process
that is granted to us under the
Constitution of the United States gives
Congress to that that authority some
people have said well don't you believe
that this would inconvenience the
president the Constitution is designed
to inconvenience one person from taking
us to war wars are very very solemn and
sobering an extraordinary act and it
should not be granted to one person
that's why the people who developed the
Constitution of the United States said
that it should be the American people
through their representatives in a group
oriented process that would ultimately
make that decision so in so in summary
I'm saying the president should file a
declaration of war if he believes at a
certain point that war is the only
option in the context of the Persian
Gulf and let us then debate the
political issue that people are saying
not
I'm missing the president I'm such
you're undermining the present but some
people are saying that by doing taking
action like this you're undermining his
ability to conduct an effective policy
and Persian Gulf putty responding I
respond to that by saying that to do
anything other than what we're
suggesting here is to undermine the
Constitution of the United States as I
said before this is not the president's
sole prerogative to take us to war that
might result in the death of tens of
thousands of American people an untold
number of people who are not americans
that is as i said before a very sobering
act so the question is do you restrict
the president's flexibility or do you
undermine the constitution of the united
states we only have one formal
government either you like it or you
don't I believe in representative
government I believe in a rule of law
and I believe in constitutional form of
government I think the president ought
to as well listen likely that the
president is only bluffing here pardon
isn't it likely that the president is
only using the war threat as a bluff and
argue depriving him of the opportunity
to to use it in that way when you talk
about a bluff you're talking about the
inconveniencing hundreds of thousands of
American people by deploying in them in
the context of the Persian Gulf and at a
time when we have extraordinary
pressures on the American budget you're
also talking about the expenditure of
billions and billions of dollars again
as I said either we have a
constitutional form of government or we
do not and that question we're coming to
the courts to say please help us clarify
this issue you think the president
really means the plague the nation the
war well the questions love I don't know
I'm not sure whether the president is
going to do it or not but all we can do
is look at the president's public
statements and he has said that i am
prepared to use an offensive military
option under certain circumstances i can
only look at what the president is doing
the president is presently meeting with
mr. Gorbachev seeking his approval on
the use of force they've sought approval
for the use of force from the United
Nations and other countries we can only
look at what these these public
pronouncements are I can't talk about
motives on the part of the president but
when I see this potential threat that
agonizes the American people that puts
tens of thousands of our
young people in harm's way then I can
only try to uphold the Constitution of
the United States what do you think that
for one chance did two people talking
about how do you think Saddam Hussein
will take the signal that at least a
tenth of the House of Representatives
questions the president's policy anybody
I think I would just like to say that in
part reply to your question part reply
to yours what the president chooses to
do in his interpretation of the
Constitution is certainly within his
prerogative our interpretation of the
Constitution where it says the Congress
shall have the power to declare war is
within our prerogative but what we both
have to exercise our responsibilities as
far as item Hussein is concerned he's
got a lot of problems and I think that
the fact that this Congress is prepared
to meet its responsibilities is our
business as a nation there are economic
sanctions in place frankly I think our
first objective in the Middle East has
already been achieved and that is the
containment of the initial aggression
that has been done we have not given the
economic sanctions a chance to work we
have not gotten our allies fully on
board we have not gotten them to help
pay for this effort to the extent that
we should we've got to get some of that
worked out in one of when some of our
chief allies in this struggle such as
the Soviet Union are not prepared to
back it with force we have to give
ourselves time to get our ducks in order
as well and to let to exhaust all
possible diplomatic means before we move
any nation but what does but does does a
suit like this give Sodom who's saying
less reason
to withdraw I don't think Saddam Hussein
intends to withdraw from Kuwait at this
point anyway I think what's good about
this system is it shows that a
constitutional democracy can function
and that we definitely show the
difference between the United States of
America and a nation like Iraq which
cannot debate war as we can I think it
makes America look good on the face of
the earth what about they let me just
let me let me just answer one let me
just answer that one question again and
expand the assumption upon the last
three questions is that the only way you
can have a peaceful option is to
threaten war and many of us don't agree
with that notion that in some way you
have to you say you're going to have a
political settlement are we going to
take you to war and I'm not sure that
that kind of bluffing and that kind of
approach makes sense we've seen that
kind of policy and in other places in
the world and some of us don't believe
that that's an appropriate way to
conduct a foreign policy and that if
you're going to try to seek a diplomatic
solution it doesn't have to be in
juxtaposition to threatening war what am
I deleted you from their house on the
scene hey on this time of idiot
and there were lots of court challenges
and when we had men and women engaged in
combat and they were unsuccessful in the
courts at a time when the course for far
more liberal than they are now what
makes you think you have a snowball's
chance in hell well this is an entirely
different situation than than the
Vietnam War there the war had already
started and traditionally Congress
supports a war or when our troops are
overseas and in jeopardy here there is
no real war started yet and but the
president obviously has something in
mind and we know that we
constitutionally have the right and that
is why we have standing in this case
this is a constitutional issue not a war
powers issue not anything else we have a
constitutional right to represent the
people and to make the decision whether
or not a real war shall begin and that's
why I think in this case we have a very
good shot at having the court except our
premise and issue the injunction is the
question not whether you have a right of
whether the president has an obligation
come to you isn't that the question that
has not been deciding what physical I
think the the president has a very real
obligation to come to Congress such a
serious obligation that in the Judiciary
Committee we took one of the articles of
impeachment was that he engaged in the
secret bombing of Cambodia for many
months and although the count did not
get enough votes I believe it got 11 or
12 votes 15 votes it is it is an issue
that is very important he has he has no
business avoiding the Constitution or
violating the Constitution which he
would be doing if he unilaterally goes
to war ask him to enjoy how can you ask
that he be enjoined from doing something
that he has
none yet and what kind of decoration to
expect the court to make mr. the purpose
of asking for an injunction is to stop
somebody from doing something and that
is what we're asking the court to do
we're not trying to stop the president
from going to war we're trying to stop
him from unilaterally going to war
without asking the Congress and
therefore the American people whether or
not we should go to war our country is
built on dialogue it is not built on
bluff her to follow up to the question
before the president would would
obviously argue that he is having a
dialogue with the Congress he said
meeting after meeting between himself
and congressional leaders plus members
of his administration well the
president's dialogue with Congress
amounts to talking to a handful of
members he hasn't talked to any of us
yet he has talked a lot more hour after
hour to foreign leaders to mr. Gorbachev
to Chancellor Kohl just one after
another but there has been no real
dialogue with Congress that I know
leaders to call Congress back into
session that's within your power you can
urge congressional leaders to call
Congress back into session to take
action on your own well I think that
each of us has his own or her own
opinion on whether or not the president
should call us back he should call us
back in if he has made the decision and
is asking us to go to war much social
leaders calling you back calling
yourselves back the congressional
leaders should not call us back because
there is no reason to yet because we
just think that the president is going
is very likely to go to war he should we
should be called back when the President
as commander-in-chief and as president
has made up his mind what to ask
Congress what do you think the court
will not just say this is a political
dispute between the legislative and
executive branches and we don't want to
get involved well of course nobody knows
what the court is going to do but we
have good lawyers here in this action
the best in the country and we think we
have standing and that this is a new
issue that has been brought up in this
lawsuit
I would just like to make one quick
comment we have tried very diligently to
separate out the process issue from the
political question as I've tried to say
before but I want to go back to the
question that that the young woman
raised do you have a snowball's chance
in hell first of all I think that that's
an incredibly yeah I I think that's an
incredibly cynical question and that
cynics don't change the world and those
of us who are standing here are
idealistic enough and optimistic enough
to believe that we have a responsibility
to try to act and if we simply said we
don't have any chance then we will not
act and people who are cynics don't
bring change finally I would say to all
of you who are members here who are
symbol here as members of the press on
every single one of your outlets over
the last several weeks you have
intimated that war is intimate and here
are 45 members of Congress standing up
saying that if indeed you truly believe
that Wars intimate intimate imminent
we're saying that the president of
United States cannot on his own make
that kind of determination so we're
trying to act we're trying to move
beyond the cynicism we're saying that if
most American people believe that it's
inevitable then the question becomes
what is the process by which we enter
into it and do we as members of Congress
have the right to stand up in that
debate and effectively represent our
constituents some who may think we
should and some who may think we should
not
thousand troops in the Saudi desert
could you do that would that pass I
would like to hope that it would but I
don't know the answer to that I don't
have a crystal ball but I would think
that with the American people beginning
to rethink when the president moved from
defend and deterred to a question of
credible offensive military options you
notice the polls started to change very
quickly because American people started
to see the prospect of going to war and
many of their young people dying in the
context of the Persian Gulf and I think
that politicians and members of Congress
try to read Poe's and try to reflect
their various constituents and I think
that there are millions of people in
this country who have serious questions
about us going to war one thing that a
declaration of war does give us is the
president rationale it seems to me that
the president should have to through the
Congress of the United States make his
case to the American people as to why he
wants to put four or five hundred
thousand troops in harm's way a
declaration of war gives us the
opportunity to debate that political
question and we're saying that we ought
to have that right and let the chips
fall where they may political why are
you not citing the War Powers Resolution
with troops in harm's way other people
may want to respond but i think the War
Powers Act is an extremely we read as a
matter of fact you may recall during the
debate on the War Powers Act in the
1970s I voted against the war powers act
that was construed at that time as a
great liberal victory and I thought that
it was a meaningless piece of
legislation and I